---
layout: post
title: "Oh, how glad I am that ActionScript 2 is dead and buried…"
post_id: 154
tags:
- ActionScript
- ActionScript 2
- Flash
excerpt: "… but unfortunately not in a personal project of mine that I started quite a while ago and which I have resumed work on recently. Today, I have been finally able to fix a bug which had already taken me some hours to trace down. Basically, mouse-over and -off events would not work properly on certain"
---

… but unfortunately not in a personal project of mine that I started quite a while ago and which I have resumed work on recently.

Today, I have been finally able to fix a bug which had already taken me some hours to trace down. Basically, mouse-over and -off events would not work properly on certain [@MovieClip@]s. After some digging through my custom code managing these events (which I needed to come up with because there is no way to let hover events bubble up the display hierarchy in ActionScript 2), I found that [@hitTest()@] wouldn't work properly on these clips.

Now the fun part began. I meticulously checked every aspect of the [@MovieClip@]s for anything special, I even considered that it might have something to do with the fact that they were positioned right behind some [@TextField@]s, which could have triggered some Flash player bugs (given that they are already surrounded by a cloud of weirdness in AS2). Nope, nothing.

It wasn't until I had already pretty much given up that I noticed that the name of the clips in question contained a period. After I removed it … [@hitTest()@] worked fine – thanks a lot for wasting my time, Adobe! Not only that this really should not happen, at least not without a runtime warning, the fact that you cannot use periods in [@MovieClip@] names is apparently undocumented.

Oh well…

