---
layout: post
title: Random D development news
tags:
  - D
  - DMD
  - GSoC
  - LDC
  - Phobos
  - SWIG
excerpt: During the last couple of weeks, I didn't really find time to update this blog. Nevertheless, however, I was able to spare some time for work on a couple open source projects related to the D programming language. But first, let me quickly summarize some other awesome news
---

During the last couple of weeks, I didn't really find time to update this blog. Nevertheless, however, I was able to spare some time for work on a couple open source projects related to the "D programming language":http://d-programming-language.org. But first, let me quickly summarize some great changes that will be in the next DMD release:

Don Clugston has basically "re-implemented CTFE":https://github.com/D-Programming-Language/dmd/pull/23 to fix a whole slew of compile-time function execution bugs, among which is the dreaded "bug 1330":http://d.puremagic.com/issues/show_bug.cgi?id=1330. There are still some regressions compared to DMD 2.052 (like "this one":http://lists.puremagic.com/pipermail/dmd-internals/2011-April/001448.html, which breaks QtD), but apart from those, it's a big step towards getting CTFE out of the »experimental feature« category. The new architecture will also make implementing reference types easier, but this is still a long way off. Then next DMD/Phobos release will also include the new "std.parallelism":http://cis.jhu.edu/~dsimcha/d/phobos/std_parallelism.html module by David Simcha, some GC optimizations and a large amount of other improvements (among which is the addition of the "parent trait":https://github.com/D-Programming-Language/dmd/commit/2e261cd640e5266c569ad224ffbfe229a0315d97, so that QtD doesn't need a patched DMD any longer) – due to the GitHub migration and the larger part of x86_64 support being done, the perceived development speed in the core community really went up a notch.

As for my own (insignificant, compared to the above) contributions, I did some work on "LDC":http://dsource.org/projects/ldc during the last few days, porting it to "LLVM 2.9":http://llvm.org/ and bringing the front-end in sync with "DMD 1.067":http://digitalmars.com/d/1.0/changelog.html – you can find the changes in the default branch over at "Bitbucket":https://bitbucket.org/lindquist/ldc. The DMD updates also contained some changes to the varargs ABI on x86_64 and other areas of the runtime interface, which I didn't merge yet, because it would require an update to Tango as well. I am not aware of any regressions so far (see the "DStress results":/code/ldc/), but feel free to ping me in case of any problems.

There were also some updates and bug fixes to D support in "SWIG":http://swig.org, most notably support for the "nspace feature":http://swig.org/Doc2.0/D.html#D_nspace, which allows you to map C++ namespaces to D packages/modules (it doesn't work for free functions and global variables yet, but this is a general SWIG restriction that could be easily lifted, just ask me if you need it). There was another SWIG release in the meantime, version 2.0.3, but it was only a »quick backup« by the maintainer before he merged some intrusive Python changes. I was caught pretty much off-guard by it and had no time for real testing and thus, it contains some bugs (mainly related to nspace support when split-proxy mode is not activated, thanks to Jonathan Pfau for the reports) – please use SVN trunk instead.

Another little project I recently worked on is "std.units":/code/units/, an units of measurement implementation for D. This topic came up several times on the NG previously, and every time it was suggested to add units support with Phobos, so I have merged the work into my Phobos fork. Please note, however, that this is in no way a formal review request yet. There are still a couple of items left on my to-do list, but before I am tackling the remaining issues, I'd greatly appreciate some feedback (see the thread on the D newsgroup, "RFC: Units of measurement for D (Phobos?)":http://www.digitalmars.com/webnews/newsgroups.php?art_group=digitalmars.D&article_id=134590).

Finally, a personal note: Yesterday, I received notice that I was accepted to work on my "Apache Thrift project":/code/gsoc/thrift under the umbrella of Digital Mars as part of the "Google Summer of Code 2011":http://www.google-melange.com/gsoc/homepage/google/gsoc2011 – thanks a lot to everybody who supported my proposals for their trust in me! I know that the expectations are high, and will do my very best to live up to them.
